---
slug: eth-pectra
title: Pectra
authors: [Proofxlab]
tags: [PoS]
---

The Ethereum Pectra upgrade was completed on May 7, 2025 (epoch 364032). This upgrade introduced multiple EIPs that improved Ethereum in various areas, including several that are directly related to Proof of Stake (PoS), such as EIP-7251, EIP-7002, and EIP-6110.

These EIPs significantly enhance the user experience (UX) for validators.

<!-- truncate -->

## 7251

The first, EIP-7251, raises the maximum balance a validator can receive rewards on from 32 ETH to 2048 ETH, through an opt-in update of withdrawal credential type.

For stakers, this enables reward compounding. Previously, any rewards earned beyond a validator's 32 ETH deposit would not count towards their active stake. Stakers who wanted to stake more than 32 ETH could only do so in fixed 32 ETH increments, relying on staking pools for anything in between. With EIP-7251, both existing and new validators can be configured to earn rewards on every ETH staked, up to 2048 ETH per validator.

This EIP also allows larger operators to consolidate multiple validators, by merging multiple 32 ETH validators. This reduces the bandwidth requirement for the network as a whole. To understand the mechanics in detail, see this page.

## 7002

EIP-7002 also extends validators' abilities, this time by introducing execution layer triggerable withdrawals. Prior to this EIP, only a validator's active signing key could trigger an exit. Now, if an Ethereum address is set as a withdrawal credential, that too can force an exit. This reduces trust assumptions in delegation settings, as the owner of the funds -- be they a human in control of an EOA or a DAO-managed smart contract -- can always trustlessly initiate an exit.

## 6110

Lastly, EIP-6110 removes a lingering vestige of pre-merge Ethereum: the delay between validator deposits and their addition to the deposit queue. Pre-merge, the Beacon Chain had to wait 2048 blocks before processing validator deposits to account for potential proof-of-work re-orgs. This is no longer necessary!

With EIP-6110, deposit processing delays now drop from around 9 hours to roughly 13 minutes. Teku engineers Lucas Saldanha and Stefan Bratanov covered the details of EIP-7002 and EIP-6110 in their joint Devcon SEA talk.

## Other EIPs

In addition, EIP-7549 and EIP-7685 are also PoS-related EIPs, but these are relatively minor improvements and have little impact on regular users and validators.

## Ecosystem

Lido protocol is the biggest staking pool on Ethereum, and it has already announced that it will support the new features introduced in Pectra through two article:

- [Lido’s Roadmap to Pectra: Ensuring Compatibility with Ethereum’s Next Upgrade](https://blog.lido.fi/lido-and-pectra-ensuring-compatibility/).
- [Lido’s Roadmap to Pectra: Navigating Complexity and the Path Forward [Pt 2]](https://blog.lido.fi/lidos-roadmap-to-pectra-navigating-complexity/)

## Resources

- [Pectra Mainnet Announcement](https://blog.ethereum.org/2025/04/23/pectra-mainnet)
- [Pectra roadmap](https://ethereum.org/en/roadmap/pectra/)